Alright we are going to talk about
HTTP and that stands for Hypertext
Transfer Protocol. So a little bit of
history behind HTTP. The development was
started by Tim Berners-Lee over at CERN
in 1989. So we are going back a little bit.
So the whole HTTP thing kind of existed
before the internet. So the original
version was HTTP/0.9 and from what I can
tell that was kind of like Tim
Berners-Lee's entire thing. So that was
like his his initial creation of it and
this started as a telnet friendly
protocol and you got to remember back in
1989 there, telnet was the primary
protocol that you used to talk to
computers as a Simple text protocol. So
pretty simple. A lot of computers still
have it installed probably in the last
let's say 10-15 years, telnet has been
frowned upon to use because it is a free
text protocol and today a few familiar
with Linux systems, SSH has definitely
shut telnet to the side. A lot of security
organizations now in enterprises
won't let you use telnet because it
literally sends out everything you type
free text across the network wire. So bad
thing to use in the enterprise but going
back to 1989, it's the tools that they
had. So this is an example of a
telnet command and you can actually go
in telnet and you tell the hostname
in the port and it's going to go back to that are
connected to IP address and the
original initial version of
HTTP, you could say GET and give it a url
and then it would return back that
resource to you and then close
connection. So this is like very easy. You
could do it from a command line. If you
like something fun to do, you can go out
to the internet and Google the website
is down. This is something that came out
least a decade ago but it's hilarious
about an IT guy and a sales guy.
Definitely not safe for work but it is a
hilarious video. But in this video, you
can see the IT guy saying the website
isn't down. He takes telnet and jumps
over to it and goes in and telnet
into the port and I thought that was
kind of cool at the time because only true
geeks really know that you can telnet
into a web server like that. So we had
version 1 from 1991 to 1995 and this
is a time when HTTP and both HTML, both
specifications were developing rapidly
and maturing rapidly and this is a time
we had a really cool new segment in the
industry of tools called web browsers. And that was like when Netscape was
in their heyday. So Netscape was like
one of the early browsers and widely
accepted. Now the standards for HTTP at
this point with the version 1.1 or 1.0,
I'm sorry, there's two groups that
jointly worked on them. One was the IETF,
Internet Engineering Task Force and then
the other was W3C, The World Wide Web
Consortium. And these guys got together
and they came up with a very detailed
specification as to how web servers had
to behave and how browsers had to behave
more. So it's kind of like a joint option
there. So as these different products
came out, this was like the standards
authority. They wrote the definitive
guide as to how these things had to
behave. Now jumping to 1.0, we can see again
that's still supporting telnet but now
you can see there where one is,
we are now including the HTTP version and
we are able to set some information
about our user agent Accept and then now
we are also getting back a status code. So
that 200 OK is an HTTP status
code there by the red 2. You can see that
with the header on the response has
also been enhanced as to what it
provides us
and this is all important for stuff for
the browser that it works with. Now HTTP/1.1 accidentally said that a couple
times. But it's been out since 1997 and
this is what we are actually still using
today. It solved a lot of ambiguities and
I hate that word, from early versions. So
there's a lot of things that weren't
clear in the specification and those
were clarified. So when something isn't
clear in a specification, it's left up to
the people implementing it to come up with
what they're going to define. So a lot of
times that doesn't work out when you
have people defining one thing and other
things to find another. Microsoft was
very good for those. They'd come up with
their own standards. So you had what the rest
of the world was doing, then what
Microsoft was doing and that's probably
why Internet explorer had such a bad
reputation of working with it. And in 1.1
of HTTP, we picked up support for
keep alive connections, chunked encoding
transfers and that. That was a big one.
That was very important and
then transferring coding was also an
important pick up in the 1.1 release. Now
this has of vow times, RFC is a
request for comments and it was HTT/1.1 that
was updated in 1999 and then again, just
not too long ago in 2014. And this is
still in use today.
1.1 is probably the most popular flavor
of HTTP out on the internet right now.
And in 1.1, we could see that encoding,
character set and cookies were added and
this is the header of a get request. So you can see we have more stuff going
on there. The Accept encoding, now we we can
specify things like gzip. So gzip can be
used to compress the content as it's
going across the wire. We are also saying
Accept languages and character sets that
we accept and then the dreaded cookies
were also enabled. Now this is an example
response under 1.1. You can see we get
some additional information here
and then where the red circle 3 and red
circle 4 are, this is actually
information about the payload. So before
in 1.0, the payload was kind of
free-formed and you just kind of got
what you got. Now you know, you have,
this is what I'm expecting to give you
on three and then the four is a
termination character. Now HTTP/2.0 is out
there. This was standardised in 2015 and
by the end of 2015, most servers, most of
the popular servers and popular browsers
did support HTTP/2.0 but I'm recording
this in May of 2017. Only about 13% of
the top 10 million websites are
supporting HTTP/2.0. So it's being slowly
adopted. So it's not out there
and it's important, the architects of
HTTP/2.0 to want to make it very
compatible with HTTP/1.1. Now in the 2.0
release a lot of it was focused on
transport performance. We want to improve
page load speed by having lower latency
and high throughput. So a lot of what's
going on in the 2.0 specification is
down at the network layer. So this is how
your web browser is going to be talking
across a network to the web server. The
semantics of what we are using as
developers is largely the same. So
for the most part, I don't think you're
going to have a lot of changes in how
you functionally use it. A lot of it it's
how it's been implemented. Like I said
it's all focused on improving
performance of your page load speeds and
performing and improving your
performance going across a network. That
concludes our talk about the history of
HTTP. It's kind of interesting how HTTP
conformed in the 90s there in
conjunction with HTML and egg time where
the whole world wide web was born and
how these standards about and got to
this point. So the 1.1 standard is pretty
mature now and for web developers,
that's effectively the API that we are
using to work within the web now. In the
next video, we are going to take a look at
the request methods that we have to work
with within the HTTP/2.0 standard and that,
for us as web developers, those are a lot
more relevant because those are
actually the verbs and the actions that
we are going to be using as we go across
the wire between the client
on the web browser or it could be a
restful api on another server to the the
back-end server that we are working
where our Spring application is running.